So far in this section, you have seen a few different ways to identify individual MLP neurons to zero
out in a forward pass.
For example, removal based on high activation values and based on statistical tests using independent
data.
The approach that I will introduce here in this video is about using matrix decomposition methods to
identify subspaces.
So these are linear combinations of all the neurons to project out of the data.
It's kind of like the opposite of using PCA for compression and noise attenuation.
That is to say normally subspace rejection is used to get rid of very small dimensions in the data that
are probably just noise.
In contrast, what I'm going to show you here is using PCA to identify the largest and the highest variance
component.
And then I will project that out of the data.
Importantly, the data set size will remain exactly the same.
So we can project out a component without actually zeroing out any individual neuron or sets of neurons.
It's a pretty neat approach conceptually, and it allows for lots of hypotheses to be tested about latent
components and linear combinations of neurons or dimensions.
I will start by giving you a brief reminder of how we can decompose a data set using the SVD, the singular
value decomposition, and then I'll switch to what we're going to do in the code demo.
You have seen a slide that looks like this several times before in this course.
And if you've taken my linear algebra course then you've also seen this slide quite a few times.
So imagine we have the MLP data set here on the left.
It is tokens by neurons or dimensions.
In fact, the full data set could also have a third dimension that would correspond to sequences in
the batch.
But I'm going to ignore that for simplicity.
The singular value decomposition allows us to decompose this matrix into the product of three other
matrices.
We have the token basis, the singular values matrix embedded in the diagonals of this matrix sigma,
and we have the MLP basis vectors.
Now if you're doing a principal components analysis, then you would take the columns of U or the rows
of V transpose as the eigenvectors or the principal components, and also as another reminder from earlier
in this course, the first row of V transpose, which is associated with the largest singular value.
That's the one up here on the top left, that is a vector that points in the direction in the data space
with the largest variance.
So the largest covariance across all the variables.
So that would be this axis over here.
Now what I am going to do here in this video is set this largest singular value to zero.
That will effectively remove that dimension from the data.
That is not the same as zeroing out any individual neuron or even a set of neurons.
In fact, all of the neurons retain some numerical value that is pretty close to their original value,
which I will demonstrate to you in the code demo.
The cool thing about this subspace removal technique is that it will preserve the dimensionality of
the data matrix, and that means that we can manipulate this MLP data matrix inside a hook function,
and then pass it along back into the model to continue with the forward pass calculations.
And so with that in mind, I will now give you an overview of the code demo before switching to code.
I'm going to work with the Excel version of GPT two, in part because it's just fun to work with these
slightly bigger models, and also in part just to demonstrate how robust this method is to the data
set size, which means it's a useful method that can be scaled up to much larger models.
For example, there are 6400 neurons in the expansion layer of the MLP, and the SVD on this data set
is going to run quite fast, in part because this is actually not the relevant dimensionality for an
SVD complexity.
The relevant dimensionality is actually the token dimensionality.
So the number of tokens.
So therefore to have some tokens to work with, I took the first paragraph of this Wikipedia page about
Ravel.
Ravel is one of my favorite composers, and if you've never heard his music before, I can recommend
giving it a listen.
Anyway, I'm going to forward pass some text here and grab the MLP activations before the Jlu non-linearity.
As you've now seen many times before, the MLP activations tend to look roughly normally distributed
and shifted to the left of zero.
Here is the key part of the code that implements the subspace removal.
So this matrix here is MLP.
This is tokens by neurons.
And in this SVD function, the second output is a vector of singular values.
And by the way, earlier in this course I was using numpy to calculate the SVD.
But the torch dot linalg module has very similar functionality.
Anyway, we need S to be converted from a vector into the sigma matrix, which is easy to do.
And then here I'm simply zeroing out the top component simply by setting the first singular value to
zero.
We don't actually have to manipulate the U or the v transpose matrix, because the largest component
in U and v transpose will multiply by this zero, and then they will effectively be zeroed out.
Okay.
So then I just have to multiply these three matrices back together to reconstruct the data without the
top component.
Here you see the size of the matrix, and that's actually the same size as the MLP matrix up here.
So what is the impact of this subspace removal.
We can explore that by comparing various data metrics between the MLP and the proj variables here.
So here you see several ways of comparing them.
The first one up here is a scatter plot.
This shows the original data by the reconstructed data with the first subspace removed.
They are certainly not identical, but they're also certainly very strongly correlated.
And it's clearly not the case that I have just zeroed out lots of individual neurons.
Their distributions look somewhat similar, although it looks like the largest component was accounting
for some of this stuff here on the side lobe here.
Actually, there is some nuance here about putting the mean value, the average value back into the
data, which I will demonstrate in the code.
Over here we have the eigen spectra of the two matrices.
So these are the scree plots from a principal components analysis.
And this pink box up here.
This is the component that I removed from the data.
It accounts for like 36 or 37% of the variance of the total MLP data set from this transformer block.
And of course after I remove this component, then there's no longer one big component that accounts
for lots of variance in the data.
These two plots down here show the covariance matrices of the data.
And they are really remarkably different.
You really see that removing the largest one dimensional subspace did not really impact the individual
data values that much, but it had a really striking impact on the relationships across the different
neurons.
This demonstrates that there are embedded multi-variable patterns in the data that were destroyed by
removing that top principal component subspace.
That's also really clear when looking at these distributions here, which show the histograms of the
covariance values.
So the covariance is in the raw data are generally pretty strong and shifted towards the right towards
positive values.
Whereas the reconstructed data with the subspace removed have a distribution that is actually a little
bit shifted towards negative.
So quite a striking result.
Anyway, the next thing I did was implement this manipulation in one layer.
Only one layer of the model in the middle of the transformer block sequence, and then measure what
happens to the hidden states for all the layers in the model.
The way that I quantified this was by comparing the hidden states for the clean model of clean version
of the model versus the subspace removed version of the model.
So the y axis here is the norm of that vector difference.
You've seen this matrix before.
It doesn't tell us exactly what is changing or how it's changing.
It's just telling us the relative size of the difference in the output of the transformer blocks from
the manipulated versus the clean version of the model.
Pretty remarkable to see that although I've only removed a one dimensional subspace from just the MLP
sub block, from just one layer that had these ripple effects that kept increasing as we got further
into the model until the very end of the model, where the last transformer block plus the final layer
norm seemed to have compensated for the differences quite a bit.
I also looked at the impact of the removal on cosine similarity of token pairs at the level of the hidden
states.
I don't have that figure right here, but it's something we will look at in the code.
Okay, so this is just about the internal vectors in the model.
Does this manipulation have any implications for the final output.
Logits.
That's what I show in this plot here.
So this is the output logit from the manipulated version of the model relative to the clean version.
And it's the logit for the next token prediction.
So a positive value in this difference metric here would mean that the clean model had a better prediction
for the next token, while a negative value would mean that the manipulated model had a better prediction
for the next token in the sequence.
And of course the x axis here is the tokens in the sequence.
We can also visualize these results as a text heatmap.
Again, red tokens here mean that the clean model predicted the token better, and blue means that the
subspace removed model predicted the tokens better.
Now, naively and at a fairly coarse grained level, we could expect that most of these data points
would be above zero.
Visually, it's not super clear whether that's really obviously the case.
It is possible that just projecting out the largest principal component is not necessarily the optimal
subspace to remove here.
It's also possible that the results differ in the different layers.
So therefore the last analysis I ran was to repeat this procedure for all of the layers individually.
Now this visualization here is fairly detailed to repeat 48 times for 48 transformer blocks.
So what I did instead was run a t test across all of the logit differences for all the tokens, with
the idea of seeing whether statistically, all of the tokens are different from zero at the kind of
sentence level at the text level.
And that's what you see in this graph here.
So here on the left plot, the x axis is the transformer block at which I ran the manipulation.
And the y axis is the t value of the t test comparing all of the logit differences against zero.
So I did not separately calculate or visualize which of these tests were individually statistically
significant, but in general, T values above somewhere around 2 or 3 will be significant.
But anyway, Qualitatively, it is certainly quite remarkable that the T test was positive for most
of the layers where I manipulated the model.
So there definitely is something consistent in this manipulation that is impairing the model's ability
to utilize context and world knowledge to make predictions about subsequent tokens.
Here in the middle panel, you see the percent variance explained by the largest component, and that
is how much of the data I removed in the subspace removal procedure.
And except for the very first transformer block, it generally goes down as we get deeper into the model.
This is actually entirely consistent with the effective dimensionality analyses that we've done several
times before.
There, the finding was that the dimensionality of the data increases as we get deeper into the model,
which means that the amount of total variance that can be captured by just one component, just the
top component that will kind of necessarily decrease.
Okay.
And then I was curious whether there is any relationship between the variance explained by the top component
and how much impact removing that component had on the final token, logits.
So therefore, I made a scatter plot of these two results and correlated them.
This is actually a fairly moderately sized negative correlation, although to be honest, I think it's
driven by a couple of these extreme points here in the beginning of the model.
I don't really see that this is a meaningful negative linear relationship between these two variables.
But this right here is a fantastic illustration of why it is dangerous and potentially misleading to
just trust a Statistical numerical results without actually looking at the data.
Anyway, as always, there is more to say about these results and how they are implemented, and I will
do that now when I switch to code.
A respectable number of libraries that we will be using here.
Here I forgot to mention, but I definitely want to run this on the GPU, since we are going to be running
the Excel version of this model for several passes.
Okay.
And then here I define this variable number of layers.
Remember there are 48 layers here.
And here is the text that I copied from this URL over here.
And we see yeah here are the tokens okay.
So there are 68 tokens in total.
And here is the function where I'm hooking the MLP.
You can see I'm putting that into the CFC.
So that is again Uh, MLP and then this layer over here, that's where we expand the dimensionality
from the embeddings dimensionality of 1600.
Uh, we expand for X to get to 6400.
Okay.
And then yeah, I'm not doing anything super sophisticated inside this hook function.
I'm just grabbing the MLP values from this layer and then detaching them.
Now this is only selecting the first sequence in the batch, but I'm only running one sequence in the
batch.
That means that this is going to give me a two dimensional matrix, whereas the variable output is actually
a tensor.
It's a three dimensional matrix because the first dimension is the sequences.
Okay.
And then I implant that into layer nine y and layer nine.
Why not just arbitrary.
It's just to give us some data so I can demonstrate the procedure to you.
Okay.
So then I run this through the model.
get the hidden states and then remove the hook.
And here you see what those the size of that matrix is again 68 tokens, 6400 MLP neurons.
And here is just the histogram of those data okay very nice.
Here I'm doing the singular value decomposition.
And when you request full matrices equals false then that gives us a square v transpose with the same
size as the number of non-zero singular values in this singular vector.
And it also means that we can use s uppercase sigma.
In the parlance of SVD, we can make this a square matrix.
Instead of requiring this to be a rectangular matrix of the same size as the data.
If you have no idea what I'm talking about, then don't worry.
That's just some nuanced details about singular value decomposition.
Basically, there's lots of empty spaces in the data set in the full data space, which we don't need
to calculate, so we are going to ignore them when we reconstruct the data.
If we had all of those null space vectors, they would all turn into zeros and sum back onto the rest
of the data set.
So we don't even need to calculate them in the first place.
That's convenient because it means that the dimensionality of the SVD corresponds to the smaller of
these two numbers, which is 68.
That is not a bad dimensionality for such a large data set.
Okay.
Now if you would just if you would comment out this line.
Right.
This, uh, is a perfect reconstruction.
This is the definition of the SVD.
So U times sigma times V transpose is exactly the original matrix.
So these two matrices would be literally numerically identical.
Okay.
But what I'm going to do is take the top component and zero out its singular value and then reconstruct
them.
Okay.
And then that gives us a new matrix that is the same size as MLP.
As I mentioned, that is convenient because it means that we can take this manipulated data set and
then just feed it back into the model in place of the original MLP data.
I'm going to get back to this cell in a moment.
What I'm doing in this cell is a bunch of visualizations that's going to create the graph that you saw
in the slides, comparing the different versions of this data set.
Okay.
Now what you see is really striking here.
The distribution of the activation values is shifted negative in the original MLP data set that you
have already seen.
But then the reconstructed version, that variable I call proj that is it's normally distributed, but
it's also centered at zero.
So we are taking the entire activations distribution and shifting it up.
We're shifting it to the right so that it has a mean of zero.
That is part of the impact of removing the top component.
Now depending on what your goal is with a singular value decomposition, that may be it relevant or
it may be pointless and you don't care.
So you can leave it like that.
But for our purposes, these numerical values and this shift of the distribution really is meaningful.
Because when I take these data, these projected data subspace, remove data and put them back into
the MLP sub block, then we are going to apply.
The model will apply the Jlu nonlinear activation function, which is going to clip all of the values
below zero.
So that's going to be a huge, huge difference.
That's probably much bigger of an impact than anything else we're doing.
So the solution to this problem is simply to take the average values from the original data and add
them back on to the projected values.
And that's what you see here.
So I'm taking the average along all of the neurons per each token and then adding it back.
And then just to let me see if I comment this out, then we can see that the average here is close to
zero.
And the average here in the MLP data is certainly not zero.
But when I run this again, then we see that the averages are nearly identical within some, you know,
reasonable tolerance of precision.
Okay.
So now I run this code again with the means added back on.
And now the two distributions are centered in the same way.
So really what we've done now is manipulate the shape of this distribution.
And, you know, we've taken some of these data points and pushed them up here.
So we've just shrunk the values a little bit.
Okay.
Yeah.
And I find it really striking, this distinction between the noticeable but fairly modest impact of
subspace removal on the data values themselves.
So the individual data values have only been tweaked a tiny, tiny bit, but the covariances across
all of the MLP neuron pairs, that is really different.
So there we've had a really significant impact.
These two distributions are almost entirely non-overlapping.
This is really quite striking this distinction here.
Again what that means is that there are patterns of correlated activations in the MLP layer that are
not present in any one neuron.
These patterns are Are distributed across hundreds or thousands of MLP neurons, and the top component
just like, obliterated them and completely removed those distributed patterns.
Okay.
So pretty neat to see.
So now what I'm going to do is create a new hook function where I implement this subspace removal procedure.
And also adding the mean offset.
But now all of this stuff is inside the hook function.
And then I'm returning the manipulated data instead of the original data okay.
So that's pretty neat.
And then yeah for which layer to implant it in.
Right now for this part of the code I'm only picking one layer I just picked, you know, halfway through
the model.
Again, it's a fairly arbitrary choice.
It was just to have something to work with okay.
So then yeah into this transformer block again MLP.
Fully connected.
Okay.
And then run the model.
Remove the hook again because.
Yeah, in a little bit I'm going to, uh, create a new hook and implant that into the model again okay.
And then this plot over here shows the norms.
So let me show you this analysis here.
This is the hidden states from the clean version of the model and the hidden states from the subspace
rejected version of the model.
And then I subtract those two vectors and then take their norm again.
This doesn't tell me what is happening and what is changing and in which direction is changing.
All it's telling me is that the difference between these two vectors is non-zero, and in fact, the
difference between the two vectors is zero for all of the blocks up until I implanted the hook.
That is a nice sanity check.
If you saw any non-zero values here that something would be wrong.
And yeah, it's quite remarkable that we did this fairly subtle manipulation.
And yet it has a pretty big impact and an impact that continues to grow as we get deeper and deeper
into the model.
So it's like this manipulation continues to have compounding effects as we get deeper into the model.
And that's maybe not so surprising, because each transformer block is taking the output from the previous
block and then adding on some little adjustment.
So if the previous block was already different, then the next block is likely to be even a little bit
more different and even a little bit more different and even a little bit more different.
So there's this drift in the embeddings that continues as we go deeper into the model.
And yeah, as you've seen many times in this course, the final transformer block is is a little bit
special.
It does its own thing.
It's the last opportunity for transforming the data before making a specific prediction about the next
token.
And then also there's the final layer norm included in here as well.
Okay.
So then what I did was look at the covariance matrices.
This is a analysis that I hinted at in the slides, but I didn't actually show the screenshot.
So let me just show you what this is.
And then I will explain it briefly.
So here I'm getting the hidden states embedding vectors for all of the tokens from the clean model and
the subspace removed model, and calculating the cosine similarity I think this was cosine.
Yeah.
So actually not covariance cosine similarity between all of the pairs of tokens.
And that's what you see here.
These are the two distributions showing that there is some impact.
But this is a really mild impact.
Packed.
So it's very interesting to think about this, uh, versus this result over here.
And what this tells us is that there are considerable and increasing differences between all the embeddings,
vectors from the subspace removed model versus all of the embeddings vectors from the clean model.
So all the vectors together are moving further apart.
But when we look at the relationships between all of the embeddings vectors within each version of this
model, then the ways that the different tokens are relating to each other is not really that much different,
a little bit different, but not that much different.
So that's quite interesting.
The entire data space is like shifting or rotating, but it's a little bit of a fixed rotation in the
sense that the way that the token embeddings vectors are correlating with each other is actually not
changing that much.
Okay.
And one other thing I want to show is the same analysis, but on the layer before the manipulation.
And this is just a sanity check again, just to make sure we don't expect to see any differences here.
These are the cosine similarities, uh, before the manipulation was actually implemented.
So of course those are the same.
Okay.
And if you like you can continue to explore this.
You can see what happens when we look considerably later in the model.
And yeah, again, the ways in which the embeddings vectors are relating to each other across the different
tokens is fairly well preserved, even though the entire space is drifting away.
Okay.
So lots of thought provoking stuff you can get out of this.
So now what I'm going to do is make that scatter plot here.
So let me just show you this plot again real quick.
So the x axis is all the tokens in this sequence.
And what I'm measuring here is the model's final output.
Logits.
And the difference in the final logits for the clean version, which would be higher numbers for larger
logits for the clean model.
Uh, and subtracting from that the logits from the subspace removed model.
So higher logits for the subspace removed model would correspond to negative values over here or blue
colors.
Okay.
So now let me show you how I did this analysis.
So I loop over all of the tokens up until the end minus one.
And the reason why we only go to minus one is because remember that, uh, at the end of the model,
the logits for the current token are not related to processing the current token.
They're related to making predictions about what token the next, what the next token should be.
So therefore I get all of the output logits for this token.
And then I logsoftmax that along the the vocab dimension.
And then I take the token or the logit corresponding to the next token in the sequence.
I hope that makes sense.
So it's the logits from the current token and the whole distribution over the entire vocab.
All 50,000 tokens.
But the specific logit that I'm interested in is the one that corresponds to what was actually presented
next.
So the next token prediction.
And that is what I take as the difference here.
Okay.
Now uh, these difference values, you can see that some of them are negative.
Some of them are positive.
I want to color them so that the negative ones are blue and the positive ones are red, and the zero
valued ones are white, or at least something that's like very close to white.
Looks more like a cream color.
But anyway, uh, to do that, I have to normalize the data.
I use this function called two slope norm.
Basically, you specify the smallest possible value which is going to be a negative number, the largest
possible value, and the value that corresponds to the center of the color map here.
So with this norm function now I can just use a color corresponding to the actual logit difference pass
through this norm function.
And that guarantees that we get blue colors for negative numbers and red colors for negative positive
numbers.
Otherwise, this function is just not going to work so well.
So I can show you that basically, uh, this matplotlib color map function is expecting values between
0 and 1, and any values that are less than zero are going to be clipped, and values greater than zero
will also be clipped at the positive value.
Let me show you.
That is what I want to.
Yeah.
So this is not so now you see you know positive values are still blue.
So that is just a quick demo of why we need this normalization in here.
Okay.
So I hope that makes sense.
Uh yeah.
It's hard to it's a nice visualization, but uh, you don't really see so much consistency.
As I mentioned in the slides, a kind of naive prediction would be that most of these values should
be red above zero, indicating that when we removed the uh, largest, uh, variance dimension from
the MLP subblock, then that impairs the model's ability to predict the next token.
And yeah, it's not super clear that that's actually happening here.
Um, I also made this text heatmap thinking that maybe if we looked at the individual tokens, we could
make some sense out of that.
And at least in this case, you know, just with this one piece of text, I don't immediately see any
meaningful or really interpretable relationships amongst the red tokens versus amongst the blue tokens.
But anyway, this is a great visualization.
Okay, so now for the final analysis.
I'm going to repeat this manipulation individually for all the layers.
So for loop over all of the layers and inside each layer I create this hook function exactly as you've
seen before.
The only difference is that I'm also storing the uh, percent variance explained by this component,
and I'm storing that in this data matrix.
And then I implant the hook, uh, run a forward pass, remove the hook so that it's clean for the next
layer.
And then here I'm running the same analysis that you saw above, and then running a t test on these
logit differences to see whether they are consistently above zero or less than zero.
I'm only storing the statistic here if you would like to expand on this analysis.
It could be interesting to also store the p value, not instead of, but in addition to.
And then in the plot below, you could separately visualize the significant versus non-significant plots.
Uh t statistics.
Okay, so two seconds on the GPU.
I don't know how long that would take on the CPU, but maybe I don't know a minute or something.
Okay.
And then the final thing is to make this visualization that I showed again, uh, without looking at
or considering individual statistical significance, we can just see that clearly across the board there
is consistency in the sign of the t test.
So in general it's mostly positive on the aggregate level.
Yeah.
Here's variance explained by the top component.
And yeah this I think that there's something unique happening here at the very beginning of the transformer
sequence here and also here with the variance explained.
And that is what's really driving these results here, which are actually pulling up the linear apparent
linear relationship here.
I think if you would exclude these or do like a Spearman correlation or robust regression, this would
probably drop down closer to zero.
I think that approaches like this have a lot of potential to yield really interesting insights into
the nature of the subspaces that are carved out by these models, being comfortable with these kinds
of methods and code to run experiments like this really opens up a lot of doors for testing specific
hypotheses about subspaces and linear combinations and distributed representations.
That said, I'm not so convinced that the specific approach of projecting out the largest principal
component is really that meaningful.
I discussed this earlier in the course when I talked about generalized eigen decomposition and targeted
decompositions, and the limitations of relying on the assumption embedded in PCA, that the largest
sources of variance reflect some kind of source or meaningful latent component in the data.
Nonetheless, the math and the procedure and the code that I showed here is the same regardless of the
linear decomposition that you apply in place of the PCA.